Hello, Sarah and I are statisticians working in the UK Government.
We lead on the development of the ShinyGovStyle R package
and we want to share a bit about our experience of how we've used it to help us
and others across the UK build production-ready RShiny apps.
During the pandemic, we saw a huge surge in people wanting more data and wanting it now.
With RShiny, we found we were able to build dashboards within hours
instead of requiring a full software engineering team that could have taken weeks or months to build.
Naturally, as all these dashboards were then appearing,
we then got a lot of pressure to be able to publish these as fast as we were making them.
So, we ended up in this position.
Statisticians standing there, fresh RShiny app in hand, knocking on the door of our IT teams.
At this point, we found lots of red tape and just generally we were lost in a world
quite far outside of our comfort zone as R developers.
We quickly realised we're not as irresistible as puss in boots,
so we had to take a different approach.
That's where we picked up the development of the Shiny GovStyle package.
We've used this to pull in the UK government design system into RShiny itself.
There are three main challenges we want to talk about today.
The first one is accessibility.
We want to make sure our apps work for all users and work for assistive technologies
such as voice activation and screen readers.
Trustworthiness.
This is all about getting our IT teams to trust that we can build reliable apps
and getting our end users to trust the apps that we publish as well.
Last but not least, as package developers, we've been battling with usefulness.
Ensuring that we can maximise the value from the time we spend on the package
and also understand our role in the wider government development landscape as well.
For accessibility, in the UK, all public sector services must follow
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, or WCAG for short.
As our developers, we've had to show that we understand
how to develop accessible web applications.
Otherwise, we're simply not allowed to publish.
First thing, we found that we weren't really aware of the range or prevalence
of accessibility needs out there.
Like many people, we often tested our dashboards ourselves
and then thought, that was that.
If it works for me, it's going to work for everyone else.
This was quite a big blind spot.
I've got a few stats from the World Health Organisation and other bodies
just to illustrate the prevalence a little bit more.
If you imagine you're in an average room of 10 adults,
8 out of 10 people in that room will have a vision impairment.
This could be full blindness, low or poor vision,
or other conditions such as cataracts.
3 out of 10 people in that room will have some form of dexterity impairment.
So, fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination will be affected.
Another 3 people in that room will only ever access the internet
using their phone.
These numbers are huge portions of the population
and not all of them will use your Shiny app.
But if you're publishing publicly or you work in an organisation
of hundreds or even thousands of users,
it's far more likely than you think that these users will need to use
your Shiny app.
I just want to take a step back for a second
and ask a very simple question.
How do you brush your teeth?
In the UK, over 2 in 3 adults now use an electric toothbrush.
And even if you don't use one personally,
you can see why they would.
They help you do more but with less effort.
So, what's not to like?
They were originally invented in 1927
just to assist people with limited motor skills
so they could brush their teeth.
And it wasn't until the 60s that manufacturers developed
more mainstream models and later on
as they gradually gained popularity.
And I find this is a really nice example
of just how designing something with accessibility in mind
to make a fairly common everyday task easier
has actually made it easier for everyone else
in the population as well.
So, hopefully it shows,
even if you were watching that earlier bit
and thought, not enough people use my Shiny app,
don't need to worry about this.
Actually, all you're doing there is cheating yourself
of the benefits of designing with accessibility in mind.
So, I've got a really simple example here
of the difference that styling and colours can make.
So, this first clip, I'm going to demo a very basic Shiny app
with no additional styling.
And I want you to see,
can you see what part of the dropdown a user is focused on?
At first, with a cursor, you can kind of look across
and see where the cursor is in relation to the dropdown.
If I navigate with a keyboard now,
can you still follow where the user is focusing?
I have fairly good vision.
I am still struggling just at a small distance from a screen
to see where this is.
It's a very light green, grey shading there.
So, this is a dropdown that's just got three options.
But imagine if you had 33 options,
how easily you could lose your place and where you are.
That's a huge difference.
So, within our package, we've added our own functions
and we add in the standard styling that has high contrast.
So, if I play this next example,
you can see how much clearer it is
to spot where the user is focusing
at any given point in time.
And having a strong contrast for interactive elements like this
or text is hugely important.
As a simple rule, you generally want to aim
for at least a 3 to 1 contrast ratio.
And I've got a QR code and link here
if you want to go and check off your own styling
because not everyone's going to want to use
the UK government branding.
You'll all have your own themes and branding yourselves
and organizations.
So, you can go off, you can check your own colors
and just make sure you have enough contrast
in places like this.
Next, I want to give you a bit of a flavor
of what it's like for a screen reader user
when they interact with a website.
So, for this one, I want you to think about
what this site is for.
Can you tell what this site is for
just from what the screen reader tells you?
Nice and clear, right?
This is what the app itself looks like.
One of the first things that was a problem here
is there was no title set.
So, it just read out the raw URL to start with.
So, immediately, you're lacking a bit of context.
As you went through the navigation links,
you said, click here, click here, click here.
You couldn't really tell what they were going for,
where they'd take you to.
There were some icons in there
that might have given you clues,
but they're not all obviously linked or clear.
As it came down the page, there was no heading.
So, you just went straight to the image.
And also, with the image, it had alt text in,
but that alt text, all it did was tell you
it was an image with information.
So, it just teased you.
And really, that might as well have not been there at all.
You just couldn't get any of this information from that.
I've got another app now
which uses our ShinyGov style package,
and I want you to see if from the screen reader readout
you can actually understand where you are in the app.
Mount Cars Explorer homepage document.
Visited link skipped to main content.
Main landmark heading level one homepage.
This website allows you to explore the Cars dataset,
comparing car models directly,
finding statistics by car characteristics
and plotting variables against each other.
Contents list with four items.
Compare characteristics. Visited link.
Charts. Visited link.
Tables. Visited link.
Homepage. Visited link.
Yes.
So, both of these examples
have the screen reader set fairly slow
for the user to understand.
First thing I think you'll notice with this one
is there was a clear title marked.
Admittedly, it struggled a little bit with empty cars.
I think they called it Mount Cars instead.
But it gives you a little bit of context straightaway
as to where you are, what the page is that you're on.
As we went down, there was a skip to main content link
which I'll show you in the next slide
when we see what the website looked like.
That allowed me with a keyboard
just to jump to the main content,
get straight to the text,
explaining what the website was.
Next, I then reverse tabbed back into the navigation links.
As soon as you went into them, you could hear
you were in a contents list.
There were four links there.
And each of the links told me
what I'd be tabbing into,
whether that was the charts or the tables
or anything like that.
So, as a user, hopefully you can see now
how big of a difference you can make
to someone who's using a screen reader.
This is what that app looked like.
I'm just going to press play here
so you can see the skip link itself.
You might have seen these on other websites.
And they're really, really helpful for keyboard users.
If you try and navigate just using your keyboard,
you'll soon start to see a lot of websites
have a lot of links and various stuff
near the top of navigation
that is usually helpful just to skip straight to the content.
And also on this, it's just a little bit cleaner,
a little bit clearer.
Even looking at it, you've got clear content.
You can see the text cleanly.
There's that title across the top.
You know what you're looking at.
On this slide, I've got a screenshot from NVDA,
non-visual desktop access,
which is the free screen reader I was using
for the last couple of examples.
And you can see how the first layout of this,
only the links are listed.
And that's because it's quite common for users
just to navigate through a site using the links alone.
If you think back to the first example
and you heard the content read out,
all the links were saying,
click here, click here, click here.
There had no real context to what they were doing.
And for users using assistive technology like this,
this has a massive impact
because of the way they tend to try and navigate about.
So imagine this screenshot,
but it just said, click here, all the way through.
How on earth would you know
where you were and what the structure of the site was
to be able to navigate it?
In practice, you probably wouldn't,
and you'd just give up.
And this is one of the things that we've done
within the package.
So to tackle this issue,
we've built our own external link function.
So we've made sure that for developers themselves,
this function's pretty much the same
as just using the tags from Shiny or HTML tools.
You put your href in, you put your link text in.
But behind the scenes, we do some accessibility checks
to help link text be a bit more useful.
So the first thing we've done is curated our own list
or data set within the package
of bad and non-descriptive link text.
Examples like click here are the common ones.
And if that's matched within the link text argument,
we just give an error
and tell the developer to be more descriptive.
We also give a warning
if link text is less than seven characters long
because one-word links are less descriptive generally.
Plus, for users with mobility impairments,
single words are actually quite hard to click on.
They're not a very big target area.
And last but not least in this,
we've also added a hidden screen reader message
that's not visual on the site all the time.
It's an option to toggle that.
But behind the scenes, it'll just add opens in a new tab
for any external links that take you to a different site.
Even as a visual user,
opening a new tab can be quite disorientating sometimes.
But if you're using a screen reader,
you can't see you're suddenly in a new tab
when you browse on a completely different site.
So this makes a huge impact just warning them
that that's what's going to happen.
It's a very simple function
in the small part of the package that we've done,
but it's a really nice example
of how we've been able to pull together
our knowledge that we've built up through this process
and put those into easy-to-use functions
to allow other developers
to build their shiny apps just as quickly
but with nice guardrails around them
to help keep them accessible.
So now I'm going to pass over to Sarah for the next section.
In an age where most people have access to the internet
and there are swathes of information out there,
how do they know what to trust?
And similarly, at a time where the information we release
is heavily scrutinized
and new cuts of data are requested frequently,
how can we convince our digital and IT colleagues
to let us publish shiny apps that statisticians have created
when a great deal of risk is involved?
To illustrate this issue,
which of these would you trust?
On the left hand here, we've got this cat facts website
which may or may not send you some spam text messages,
and on the right hand side,
we've got the National Geographic page
which clearly lists out some facts about cats.
The stakes here are clearly lower
when we're trying to find out cat facts,
but for the general public,
how do they know what they can trust
for schools, the economy or the environment?
People are aware of misinformation on the web
but we need to make it clear to our users
that our statistics are trustworthy
and can be relied upon.
We also need to closely work with security and IT experts
in our departments to clear any external outputs,
but how can we get their buy-in
if our pages look more like catfacts.org
and less like National Geographic?
This is where gov.uk design comes in.
The simple and clean design of gov.uk
gives users trust in our outputs
and presents them with a familiar layout.
The design's been really extensively tested
and developed with user researchers,
making sure that it works for users
with all different types of accessibility needs.
And this CSS is published online for developers to use
on the gov.uk design system website.
It's helpfully split out into components
like you can see with the button here.
It tells developers when they should use the component,
how it works, and has links to the underlying HTML.
We can then use this CSS file,
make some minor tweaks,
and then use the attached dependencies call
from HTML tools to attach this static CSS styling
to our shiny widgets in shiny-gov-style.
To demonstrate the impact of this,
take a look at an app with and without
the shiny-gov-style styling attached.
So this is our showcase example app
and you can see that without the shiny-gov-style styling,
the radio buttons are stacked on top of each other,
we've got quite messy contents,
and the cookies and the header bar
all look quite cluttered.
As soon as we've attached the CSS styling
with that attached dependencies call,
this neatens it up and brings it into the gov.uk design.
This results in a page that's powered by shiny
but looks and feels like a real gov.uk page.
So on the left here in this example,
I've got a real gov.uk service
and this is civil service jobs.
And on the right hand side,
I've mocked this up using our shiny-gov-style package.
You'll see the design elements are really similar
from the heading bars and the cookies
to the beta banner and the email and password entry.
And there's a really clear link to accessibility here.
So being able to navigate pages with a similar layout,
it's really important for those
who can't visually see a screen.
Like we saw in Cam's demo earlier,
it does take a while to orient yourself
in a new and unfamiliar page layout.
So using the gov.uk layout benefits both users
with accessibility needs and those without.
And this clear similarity helps us gain trust
with our stakeholders who we need to convince
to let us release information this way
and our users who need to be able to rely on our outputs.
IT and digital know that the elements in the page
meet accessibility guidelines,
although they'll still need to check this
on a case-by-case basis to make sure
that analysts are using these appropriately.
And users of apps,
whether they can visually see the page or not
will be familiar with this design,
building trust in our outputs.
The last barrier that we faced
was something that might be familiar
to all package developers,
and that is usefulness.
So how do we keep the package useful to our users
without making unnecessary work for ourselves?
Our package is developed and maintained
by a team of volunteers
across lots of different departments
in UK sort of service.
So utilizing their resource effectively
is really important.
Our GitHub issue log helps us keep on top
of what users are asking for,
what bugs have been raised,
and which volunteer is working on it.
One example of a useful feature
that we've recently added to the package
is styled reactable tables
to something that a user had requested.
So out of the box,
these aren't always suitable for GitHub.UK dashboards.
You might be able to see
there's a very small sorting arrow
that appears at the top,
but these are really hard to make out
with visual impairments.
We decided it was worth our time
to add new CSS for reactables
to the standard Gov.UK design
as it is a fairly niche use
for analysts building R Shiny dashboards
and unlikely to have any replication across government.
The result of this is a Gov-styled reactable table.
So we took a lot of elements
from the current static table in the top left,
which was designed on the Gov.UK design system.
So we don't want to diverge too far
from this user research design,
and we want to keep that trust with our users.
So this simply adds in things like accessible sorting
with the blue bars you can see
at the top and the bottom of the column headers
and accessible hover overs with that yellow highlight
so that it's really clear what a user is focusing on.
An example of an issue
that we decided not to fix is dark mode.
So this is a much wider government issue,
and it's been raised with the design team for many years.
They've been looking at tackling it in the long run,
and we don't just want to spin up a version of it
that analysts will come to use,
which we then need to change to fit
with wider government branding later on.
So building 50 different versions of dark mode
can make it really hard to keep that trust with users
that we mentioned earlier across all services.
Dark mode's been an ongoing conversation since 2018.
You can see when this person raised it.
And in GovDesign, there are a lot of changes involved
that are much bigger than our little package
with a fairly small use case for analytical dashboards.
This thread shows a lot of people going off
and building their own versions,
each different from each other,
and we don't want to be adding to this list of things
to consolidate once a fix is finally in.
So there's a real challenge here
in deciding where best to spend our time
as package developers to add the most value.
And the solution's been working really closely
with both of our users and the wider government
to understand how the package is being used
and when wider changes might affect it.
Thanks to ShinyGovStyle,
analysts all the way across government
have now been able to easily publish dashboards
for both external and internal use.
The package has lowered the barrier for entry
to publishing dashboards for many analysts,
and it's now used in a range of departments
from education and tax, where Cam and I work,
to health and the environment.
So no more begging our IT colleagues
to let us publish these dashboards
thanks to ShinyGovStyle.
The package continues to be maintained
by a team of volunteers across government
who are all really passionate about making sure
that our apps and services are accessible to everybody.
If you want to find out more
or have a little poke around our package,
please scan this QR code,
which will take us to the documentation
for ShinyGovStyle.
From there, that links out to our source code on GitHub,
and you can contact either me or Cam through there too.
Thanks for your time today.